.TH SLAG 1 "2026-07-03" "slag 0.13" "Slag Programming Language"
.SH NAME
slag \- compile Slag source files to native Win64 PE executables
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B slag
.I file.slag
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B Slag
is a statically typed, compiled systems programming language that targets
native Win64 PE executables. The compiler translates
.I .slag
source files directly into NASM x86-64 assembly for the
.B win64
object format. Compiled programs link against no C runtime; only
.BR kernel32.dll ,
.BR user32.dll ,
.BR gdi32.dll ", and"
.BR ws2_32.dll " (networking)"
are imported, and only as needed by the features a given program uses.
.PP
Running
.B slag
on a source file produces a
.I .asm
file of the same base name. This must be assembled with NASM and linked
with a Win64-capable linker (such as the MinGW-w64 GCC driver) to produce
a runnable
.I .exe
file. See
.B EXAMPLES
below for the full pipeline.
.SH LANGUAGE OVERVIEW
.SS Source files
Slag source files use the
.B .slag
extension. A program is a sequence of top-level function declarations.
Execution begins at
.B main()
if one is defined; otherwise execution begins at the first function
declared in the file.
.SS Types
.TP
.B int
64-bit signed integer.
.TP
.B float
64-bit IEEE double. Mixed int/float expressions are promoted
automatically (int operands are converted via
.BR cvtsi2sd );
assigning a float expression to an
.B int
truncates via
.BR cvttsd2si .
No explicit cast syntax exists or is required.
.TP
.B str
A string value, internally represented as a pointer/length pair.
String literals are double-quoted and support
.BR \en ,
.BR \et ,
.BR \e\e ,
.BR \e" ,
and
.B \e0
escapes.
.TP
.B bool
Boolean value,
.B true
or
.BR false .
.TP
.B void
Used only as a function's declared return type for functions that
return no value.
.SS Variables and arrays
Every variable is declared with an explicit scope modifier,
.B global
or
.BR local ;
there is no unscoped declaration form:
.PP
.RS
.nf
local int x = 5;
local float f = 3.14;
local str  s = "hello";
local int[5] nums = {10, 20, 30, 40, 50};
.fi
.RE
.PP
Arrays are fixed-size and 1-dimensional. Indexing uses
.BR arr[i] ,
and the element count is available via
.BR arr.len .
.SS Variable scope
.TP
.B global
Declares a file-scope variable stored in the .data section, accessible
from any function:
.PP
.RS
.nf
global int counter = 0;
global str appName = "MyApp";
.fi
.RE
.TP
.B local
Declares a block-scoped, stack-allocated variable:
.PP
.RS
.nf
local int x = 10;
.fi
.RE
.SS Arithmetic expressions
Arithmetic operators work directly on expressions, with no wrapper
syntax or variable sigil required. The same plain expression syntax
is used everywhere, including
.B if
and
.B while
conditions:
.PP
.RS
.nf
i = i + 1;
total = total + nums[j];
while (i < nums.len) { ... }
.fi
.RE
.SS Control flow
.B if
/
.B else
(including chained
.BR "else if" )
and
.B while
are supported. There is no
.B for
loop.
.SS Functions
Functions are declared with the
.B function
keyword. Parameters are typed; the return type is declared at the
.B return
statement itself rather than in the function signature:
.PP
.RS
.nf
function add(int a, int b) {
    return int a + b;
}
function greet(str name) {
    println(name);
    return;
}
.fi
.RE
.SH BUILT\-IN FUNCTIONS
.SS I/O
.TP
.BI print( expr )
Print a value (int, float, or str) to standard output with no trailing
newline.
.TP
.BI println( expr )
Print a value (int, float, or str) to standard output followed by a
trailing newline.
.TP
.BI readline()
Read a line of input from standard input. Returns a
.BR str .
.TP
.BI readfile( path )
Read the entire contents of the file at
.I path
into a
.BR str .
.SS Windowing and graphics
.TP
.BI window.open( width , " height" , " title" )
Create a window of the given dimensions and title, with a BGRA pixel
framebuffer, running on its own thread. Window state is stored in
thread-local storage (TLS), so multiple threads can each open their
own independent window. Rendering calls (
.BR fill_triangle* )
and per-window input state both resolve their target window fresh
via TLS on every call, so multiple simultaneously open windows do
not interfere with each other's drawing or input.
.TP
.B window.close()
Request that the open window close.
.TP
.B window.is_open()
Returns 1 if the window is still open, 0 otherwise. Intended for use
as a main-loop condition.
.TP
.B window.flush()
Drain any deferred
.B fill_triangle*
calls (see below), pump the window's message queue, and blit the
current framebuffer contents to the screen. Rendering is uncapped:
no frame-rate limiting is applied, so throughput is bounded only by
rasterization and blit cost.
.TP
.B window.capture_mouse()
Capture the mouse, clip the cursor to the window bounds, and hide the
cursor. Useful for FPS-style controls.
.TP
.B window.release_mouse()
Release mouse capture and show the cursor.
.TP
.B window.native()
Returns the native screen resolution as a string in "WxH" format
(e.g., "1920x1080").
.TP
.BI window.clear( r , " g" , " b" )
Fill the entire DIB framebuffer with a solid color via a single
.B rep stosd
fill. Typically called once per frame before drawing.
.TP
.BI window.text( x , " y" , " value" , " r" , " g" , " b" )
Draw
.I value
(a
.B str
or
.BR int )
as text at
.RI ( x , " y" )
via GDI
.BR TextOutA ,
composited into the same DIB surface that
.B window.flush()
blits.
.TP
.BI pixel( x , " y" , " r" , " g" , " b" )
Write a single RGB pixel into the framebuffer at
.RI ( x , " y" ).
Out-of-bounds coordinates are silently ignored.
.PP
All
.B fill_triangle*
variants below perform backface culling: a signed-area winding test
discards triangles whose vertices are not in counter-clockwise order
as seen on screen (screen y increases downward, so this is the
opposite sense of CW/CCW in standard math y-up coordinates).
.TP
.BI fill_triangle( x0 , " y0" , " x1" , " y1" , " x2" , " y2" , " r" , " g" , " b" )
Rasterize a flat-shaded, solid-color triangle directly into the
framebuffer. Calls are deferred into a per-frame queue (starts at
1024 entries, doubles as needed \- no hard cap) rather than drawn
immediately;
.B window.flush()
drains it. Queues below 64 triangles drain sequentially on the
calling thread; queues at or above 64 dispatch across a persistent
worker pool (lazily spawned, sized from
.BR cpu.safe_thread_limit() ,
capped at 32 threads), splitting the framebuffer into horizontal row
bands with one band per worker. Transparent to existing programs \-
no syntax changes, identical output, just faster under heavy
triangle load on multi-core machines.
.TP
.BI fill_triangle_gradient( x0 , " y0" , " r0" , " g0" , " b0" ", ..." )
Rasterize a triangle with independently specified per-vertex colors,
linearly interpolated (Gouraud-style) across the triangle's interior.
.TP
.BI fill_triangle_z( x0 , " y0" , " z0" ", ..." , " r" , " g" , " b" )
Rasterize a flat-shaded triangle with per-pixel depth testing against
the active z-buffer. Each vertex carries a floating-point depth
.RI ( z );
a pixel is drawn only when it is nearer (smaller
.IR z )
than the value already stored in the depth buffer.
.TP
.BI fill_triangle_affine( x0 , " y0" , " u0" , " v0" ", ..." , " tex_ptr" , " tex_w" , " tex_h" )
PS1-style affine texture-mapped triangle. UV coordinates are linearly
interpolated without perspective correction. The texture must be in
RGB565 format (2 bytes per pixel, RRRRRGGG GGGBBBBB).
.TP
.BI fill_triangle_persp( x0 , " y0" , " z0" , " u0" , " v0" ", ..." , " tex_ptr" , " tex_w" , " tex_h" )
PS2-style perspective-correct texture-mapped triangle. Interpolates 1/z,
u/z, v/z and divides to recover true UV coordinates, eliminating texture
warping on angled surfaces. The inner loop corrects perspective every 8
pixels and interpolates UV affinely between (classic PS2 subdivision,
~20x fewer divisions), writing each pixel as a single 32-bit BGRA store.
.PP
Near-plane safety: any vertex at or behind the camera (z <= 0), or
projected far outside the active window's bounds (~8x margin), silently
discards the triangle before rasterization. This guards against the
degenerate 1/z blowup near-camera geometry produces; it is not a full
geometric clip. It does not protect a caller's own perspective divide
computed in Slag script code before the call \(em scripts should still
guard z > 0 themselves before projecting.
.TP
.BI fill_triangle_pcolor( verts , " tex_ptr" , " tex_w" , " tex_h" )
Perspective-correct textured triangle with per-vertex colors. The
.I verts
parameter points to 24 int64 values (3 vertices x 8 values: x,y,z,u,v,r,g,b).
Texture color is multiplied by interpolated vertex color.
.PP
The same near-plane safety net as fill_triangle_persp applies: any
vertex at or behind the camera, or projected far outside the window's
bounds, silently discards the triangle before rasterization.
.TP
.B zbuffer.clear()
Reset the depth buffer to a far value prior to rendering a frame.
.TP
.B time.now_us()
Microseconds via QueryPerformanceCounter/QueryPerformanceFrequency;
high-resolution timing for benchmarks and precise frame timing.
.TP
.B time.now_ms()
Returns milliseconds elapsed since system start, for frame timing and
FPS measurement.
.SS CPU topology
At startup the runtime calls
.B GetLogicalProcessorInformation
and populates a set of read-only globals accessible via the
.B cpu.*
builtins:
.TP
.B cpu.physical_cores()
Number of physical processor cores as reported by the OS.
.TP
.B cpu.logical_cores()
Total number of logical processors (hardware threads), equal to
physical cores times threads-per-core when SMT is active.
.TP
.B cpu.threads_per_core()
Logical cores divided by physical cores. 2 when SMT/Hyper-Threading
is active, 1 otherwise.
.TP
.B cpu.safe_thread_limit()
.BR cpu.logical_cores() \ \-\ 1,
with a minimum of 1. A conservative upper bound for the number of
worker threads to spawn so that one logical core is left free for the
OS and the window thread.
.TP
.B cpu.hyperthreaded()
Returns 1 if SMT (Intel Hyper-Threading or AMD SMT) is detected on at
least one physical core, 0 otherwise. Detected via the
.B ProcessorCore.Flags
field of
.BR SYSTEM_LOGICAL_PROCESSOR_INFORMATION .
If
.B GetLogicalProcessorInformation
fails, all
.B cpu.*
values fall back to 1 and
.B cpu.hyperthreaded()
returns 0.
.TP
.B cpu.simd_detect()
Re-runs CPUID/XGETBV SIMD feature detection (also run automatically at
startup); idempotent, returns 1.
.TP
.BR cpu.has_sse() ", " cpu.has_sse2() ", " cpu.has_sse3() ", " cpu.has_ssse3() ", " cpu.has_sse41() ", " cpu.has_sse42() ", " cpu.has_fma() ", " cpu.has_avx() ", " cpu.has_avx2() ", " cpu.has_avx512f()
Return 1 if the named instruction-set extension is present, else 0. The
AVX, AVX2, and AVX\-512F predicates additionally require OS\-enabled
register state (OSXSAVE plus XCR0), so they return 0 when the CPU
supports the ISA but the OS has not enabled it.
.SS Concurrency
.B "thread { ... }"
spawns a Win32 thread running the block body; the body is compiled to a
standalone thread procedure and launched with
.BR CreateThread .
Multiple thread blocks may be spawned before a sync (up to 64 outstanding).
.PP
.B "sync { ... }"
waits for all threads spawned since the last sync using
.BR WaitForMultipleObjects ,
closes their handles, and resets the handle table. Statements inside the
sync body run after the wait completes.
.PP
.B "lock { ... }"
provides mutual exclusion via a single global
.B CRITICAL_SECTION
initialized at startup, bracketing the body with
.B EnterCriticalSection
and
.BR LeaveCriticalSection .
Only one thread runs inside any lock block at a time; the section is
reentrant on the owning thread.
.SS Memory and buffers
Raw heap buffers, addressed by plain-integer pointers. Accessors are unchecked and inlined to a single machine instruction at
the call site (no function-call overhead); bounds are the programmer's
responsibility.
.TP
.B mem.alloc(nbytes)
Allocate zero-initialized heap memory; returns the buffer address as an
integer, or 0 on failure.
.TP
.B mem.free(ptr)
Free a buffer obtained from mem.alloc.
.TP
.BR mem.poke8(ptr,byteoff,val) ", " mem.peek8(ptr,byteoff)
Store / load a single byte at a byte offset.
.TP
.BR mem.poke64(ptr,byteoff,val) ", " mem.peek64(ptr,byteoff)
Store / load 8 bytes at a byte offset.
.TP
.BI mem.pokef32( ptr , " byteoff" , " floatval" )
Store a 32-bit float at a byte offset (narrowed from Slag's 64-bit
double). Lets SIMD vec4 buffers be filled with readable float literals
instead of hand-packed IEEE-754 bit patterns.
.SS File I/O
Handle-based file primitives plus path-based utility ops. Paths are
plain null-terminated strings; string literals in Slag are always
null-terminated. Sizes/offsets use the classic 32-bit Win32 file APIs,
so files over ~4GB are not supported.
.TP
.BI file.open( path , " mode" )
Open a file. mode: 1=read, 2=write (create/truncate), 3=append. Returns
an int handle, or -1 on failure.
.TP
.B file.close(handle)
Close a file handle.
.TP
.BI file.read( handle , " buf" , " nbytes" )
Read up to nbytes into buf. Returns bytes read, or -1 on failure.
.TP
.BI file.write( handle , " buf" , " nbytes" )
Write nbytes from buf. Returns bytes written, or -1 on failure.
.TP
.BI file.seek( handle , " offset" , " whence" )
Seek within a file. whence: 0=start, 1=current, 2=end. Returns the new
position, or -1 on failure.
.TP
.B file.size(handle)
Return the file's size in bytes, or -1 on failure.
.TP
.B file.exists(path)
Return 1 if path exists, 0 otherwise.
.TP
.B file.delete(path)
Delete a file. Returns 1 on success, 0 on failure.
.TP
.B file.mkdir(path)
Create a directory. Returns 1 on success, 0 on failure.
.PP
Directory listing is per-handle: each file.list_open() call heap-allocates
its own search state, so multiple listings can be open and interleaved
without corrupting each other.
.TP
.B file.list_open(pattern)
Open a directory listing. pattern is a glob such as "dir/*" or
"dir/*.ext" (Win32 FindFirstFileA semantics, not a bare directory path).
Returns an int handle, or -1 on failure.
.TP
.B file.list_next(handle)
Advance to the next matching entry. Returns 1 if there is a new current
entry, 0 if the listing is exhausted.
.TP
.B file.list_name(handle)
Return the current entry's filename as a str.
.TP
.B file.list_close(handle)
Close a directory listing handle.
.SS Audio
Software-mixed PCM audio output over winmm's waveOut (link with
-lwinmm). Up to 32 sounds may be loaded and mixed simultaneously via a
background thread; all loaded WAV files must exactly match the format
given to audio.init \(em there is no resampling or format conversion.
.TP
.BI audio.init( rate , " channels" , " bits" )
Open the audio device at this exact format. Returns 1 on success, 0 on
failure.
.TP
.B audio.close()
Stop the mixer thread and close the audio device.
.TP
.B audio.load(path)
Parse a RIFF/WAVE file and register it as a loaded sound. Returns an
int handle, or -1 on failure (file not found, malformed RIFF, missing
fmt/data chunk, format mismatch against audio.init, or no free slot).
If the file has a "smpl" chunk with at least one loop point, it is
parsed automatically and used by audio.loop(); otherwise looping wraps
the entire file.
.TP
.B audio.free(handle)
Free a loaded sound and its underlying file buffer.
.TP
.B audio.play(handle)
Play once from the start of the file, ignoring any loop points.
.TP
.B audio.loop(handle)
Play from the start once, then repeat the
.I "[loop_start, loop_end)"
region forever (the whole file if no smpl chunk was found).
.TP
.B audio.stop(handle)
Stop playback and reset position to the start.
.TP
.BI audio.volume( handle , " vol" )
Set this sound's volume, 0-255.
.TP
.B audio.master_volume(vol)
Set the master volume, 0-255, applied to every sound during mixing.
.TP
.B audio.is_playing(handle)
Return 1 if the sound is currently playing (including mid-loop), 0
otherwise.
.TP
.B audio.position(handle)
Return the current byte offset into the sound's PCM data.
.PP
Known limitations: no pause/resume (audio.stop always resets position to
0); no stereo panning (volume only, no left/right balance); each loaded
sound has exactly one playback slot, so overlapping the same sound with
itself requires loading it into separate handles; no pitch/rate
variation; audio.load reads the entire file into memory (no streaming).
.SS Bit manipulation
.TP
.B bit.shl(value,count)
Left shift. Inlined to a single shl instruction; enables 16.16 fixed-point
arithmetic (e.g., bit.shl(n, 16) converts an integer to fixed-point).
.TP
.B bit.shr(value,count)
Unsigned right shift. Inlined to a single shr instruction; bit.shr(fixed, 16)
converts fixed-point back to integer.
.SS Matrix stack
A 3x4 transformation matrix stack using 16.16 fixed-point arithmetic.
Pre-computed sin/cos lookup tables enable fast rotation. All coordinates
use fixed-point format: convert with bit.shl(n, 16), convert back with
bit.shr(result, 16).
.TP
.B mat.identity()
Reset current matrix to identity.
.TP
.BR mat.push() ", " mat.pop()
Push current matrix onto stack (16 levels max) / pop from stack.
.TP
.B mat.translate(x,y,z)
Multiply translation into current matrix.
.TP
.B mat.scale(sx,sy,sz)
Multiply scale into current matrix.
.TP
.BR mat.rotate_x(angle) ", " mat.rotate_y(angle) ", " mat.rotate_z(angle)
Multiply rotation into current matrix. Angle 0-255 maps to 0-360 degrees.
.TP
.BR mat.transform_x(x,y,z) ", " mat.transform_y(...) ", " mat.transform_z(...)
Transform a point by the current matrix, returning a single coordinate.
.SS SIMD (SSE2)
128-bit vector operations for graphics and bulk processing. All pointer
arguments are 16-byte buffers (from mem.alloc).
.TP
.BR simd.addf4(d,a,b) ", " simd.subf4 ", " simd.mulf4 ", " simd.divf4
Packed 4-float arithmetic operations.
.TP
.B simd.dot4(d,a,b)
Dot product of two vec4s; result broadcast to all 4 elements.
.TP
.B simd.cross3(d,a,b)
3D cross product (w component = 0).
.TP
.B simd.normalize4(d,v)
Normalize a vec4 to unit length.
.TP
.B simd.lint4(d,a,b,t)
Linear interpolation: a + t*(b-a).
.TP
.B simd.mat4_mul(d,a,b)
4x4 matrix multiply (row-major).
.TP
.B simd.mat4_vec4(d,m,v)
Matrix-vector multiply.
.TP
.B simd.rgb565_unpack(r,g,b,pixels)
Extract R/G/B channels from 8 RGB565 pixels.
.TP
.B simd.rgb565_pack(d,r,g,b)
Pack R/G/B channels to 8 RGB565 pixels.
.TP
.B simd.rgb565_blend(d,a,b,alpha)
Alpha blend 8 RGB565 pixels (alpha: 8x16-bit values, 0-256 range).
.SS BMP and mesh management
BMP image loading and mesh management for 3D geometry.
.TP
.BR mesh.bmp_width(ptr) ", " mesh.bmp_height(ptr)
Return dimensions of a 24-bit uncompressed BMP loaded via readfile().
.TP
.B mesh.bmp_pixel(ptr,x,y)
Return 0x00RRGGBB for the pixel at (x,y).
.TP
.B mesh.bmp_gray(ptr,x,y)
Return grayscale value 0-255 for the pixel at (x,y).
.TP
.B mesh.create(verts,faces)
Allocate a mesh with capacity for N vertices and M faces; returns handle.
.TP
.B mesh.destroy(handle)
Free mesh memory.
.TP
.BR mesh.set_vertex(h,i,x,y,z) ", " mesh.get_vertex_x(h,i) ", etc."
Set or get vertex coordinates (16.16 fixed-point).
.TP
.BR mesh.set_face(h,i,v0,v1,v2) ", " mesh.get_face(h,i,c)
Set or get face vertex indices (c=0/1/2).
.TP
.B mesh.from_heightmap(bmp_ptr,scale_xz,scale_y)
Generate terrain mesh from grayscale BMP.
.TP
.BR mesh.vertex_count(h) ", " mesh.face_count(h)
Query mesh size.
.SS Procedural textures
Generate procedural texture values (0-255 grayscale).
.TP
.B tex.checker(x,y,size)
Returns 0 or 255 in a checkerboard pattern.
.TP
.BR tex.gradient_h(x,width) ", " tex.gradient_v(y,height)
Linear gradient from 0 to 255.
.TP
.B tex.brick(x,y,bw,bh,mortar)
Brick pattern (0=mortar, 255=brick).
.TP
.B tex.noise2d(x,y,seed)
Hash-based noise, returns 0-255.
.TP
.B tex.perlin2d(x,y,freq,seed)
Perlin noise, returns 0-255.
.TP
.BR tex.wood(x,y,rings,seed) ", " tex.marble(x,y,freq,seed)
Organic patterns (wood grain, marble veins).
.SS Networking
TCP networking via ws2_32; supports persistent peer-to-peer sessions
between two machines running the same program. Programs using networking
must link
.B ws2_32
.RB ( \-lws2_32 ).
.TP
.BR net.start() ", " net.end()
Begin a networking session (WSAStartup) / close sockets and clean up.
.TP
.B net.bind(port)
Create a socket, bind, and listen on a port (does not block).
.TP
.B net.accept()
Block until a peer connects to the bound socket; call in a loop for a
persistent listener.
.TP
.B net.listen(port)
Convenience call: bind, listen, and accept in one blocking step.
.TP
.B net.connect(host, port)
Connect to a peer; host is a string literal such as "127.0.0.1".
.TP
.BR net.send(byte) ", " net.recv()
Send / receive a single byte (recv returns an int, \-1 on failure).
.TP
.B net.send_buf(ptr, len)
Send len bytes from a buffer, looping until all are sent.
.TP
.B net.recv_buf(ptr, maxlen)
Receive up to maxlen bytes into a buffer; returns the count (0 when the
peer closes). A single recv may return fewer bytes than requested. A
connection made via
.B net.connect()
is non-blocking, so
.BR net.recv() " and " net.recv_buf()
may also return \-2 (no data available this instant, connection still
alive \(em not an error). A connection made via
.BR net.bind()/net.accept()/net.listen()
keeps its original blocking behavior and never returns \-2.
.TP
.B net.ack()
Returns 1/0: did the last network operation succeed.
.TP
.B net.connected()
Returns 1/0: is the active connection still alive. Performs an active
non-blocking check rather than reading a passive flag, so it reflects the
peer disconnecting even without a recent send/recv. TCP keepalive is also
enabled on connect, so a peer that vanishes silently (no FIN/RST ever
sent) is still detected within roughly 7\-12 seconds.
.SS Persistent multi-client server and LAN discovery
Built on the networking primitives above,
.B net.server_*
is a non-blocking multi-client TCP server for a game-server model, and
.B net.discover_*
is UDP-based LAN discovery so a client can find a running server without
knowing its address ahead of time. Both are additive to the single-peer
API above, which is unaffected.
.TP
.B net.server_start(port, name)
Host: WSAStartup + socket+bind+listen (TCP), and opens a UDP discovery
listener (fixed port 9001) advertising name and port to browsing clients.
.TP
.B net.server_accept()
Host: returns a client slot index, or \-1 if none pending; non-blocking,
call every tick. Also services one pending discovery query per call.
.TP
.BR net.server_send(idx,\ byte) ", " net.server_recv(idx)
Host: per-client single-byte send/receive.
.B net.server_recv
returns the byte, \-2 (no data yet, still connected), or \-1 (peer
disconnected, slot freed).
.TP
.BR net.server_send_buf(idx,\ ptr,\ len) ", " net.server_recv_buf(idx,\ ptr,\ maxlen)
Host: per-client buffered send/receive, same \-2/\-1 contract as above.
.TP
.B net.server_connected(idx)
Host: returns 1/0, an active non-blocking check for one client slot.
.TP
.B net.server_stop()
Host: closes every client socket, the TCP listener, and the UDP discovery
socket, then WSACleanup.
.TP
.B net.discover_send()
Client: fires one UDP broadcast discovery query. Internally rate-limited
to once per second, so it is safe to call every tick.
.TP
.B net.discover_poll()
Client: returns the discovered-server slot index just updated, or \-1;
non-blocking, call every tick.
.TP
.B net.discover_count()
Client: returns the number of servers currently listed.
.TP
.BR net.discover_ip(idx) ", " net.discover_port(idx) ", " net.discover_name(idx)
Client: returns the discovered server's address (string), TCP port
(int), and advertised name (string).
.TP
.BR net.discover_max(idx) ", " net.discover_clients(idx)
Client: returns the server's max client capacity and its live connected
count as of its last reply.
.PP
Client slot capacity is a single compile-time constant
.RB ( SERVER_MAX_CLIENTS " in " server_runtime.c ,
currently 4, designed to scale to 64 by changing that one value). A
client connects to a
.B net.server_*
host with the ordinary single-peer API
.RB ( net.start() " + " net.connect(ip,\ port) ),
typically using the ip/port from
.BR net.discover_ip(0)/net.discover_port(0) " after browsing \(em "
.B net.server_*
itself is host-only. Discovered servers are not removed just because
they become full or gain a client; only a server that stops answering
entirely is pruned, after about 6 seconds with no fresh reply.
.SS Input event handlers
Event handlers are declared with the
.B on
keyword inside a function body and are dispatched directly from the
window procedure:
.PP
.RS
.nf
on key_down(int key) { ... }
on key_up(int key) { ... }
on mouse_move(int x, int y) { ... }
on mouse_down(int button) { ... }   // 0=left, 1=right, 2=middle
on mouse_up(int button) { ... }
on mouse_wheel(int delta) { ... }   // delta is +-120 per notch
.fi
.RE
.PP
Handlers not declared by the program default to no-op stubs.
.SS Per-window input state
Because event handlers execute in their own stack frames, separate
from the main loop, a small set of accessor builtins is provided so
handlers and the main loop can communicate. This state is stored
per-window (resolved via TLS, like the framebuffer and z-buffer),
not in a single shared global, so drag/wheel/last-position/bbox
state from one window's events never leaks into another window's:
.PP
.RS
.nf
input.drag_x() / input.drag_y()
input.add_drag(dx, dy)
input.is_dragging() / input.set_dragging(v)
input.last_x() / input.last_y() / input.set_last(x, y)
input.wheel()           // returns and resets accumulated wheel delta
input.add_wheel(delta)
input.set_bbox(minx, miny, maxx, maxy)
input.in_bbox(mx, my)   // axis-aligned hit test
.fi
.RE
.SH NOT YET IMPLEMENTED
The following are described in the language design but are not
currently functional:
.IP \(bu 2
Dynamic arrays
.IP \(bu 2
Encrypted peer-to-peer via Windows CNG (bcrypt) Diffie\-Hellman key
exchange and AES (planned; the networking and memory primitives it
depends on are in place)
.IP \(bu 2
A self-hosting compiler
.RS
.nf
cd compiler
gcc -Wall -Wextra -o slag main.c lexer.c ast.c parser.c codegen.c \e
    window_runtime.c net_runtime.c mem_runtime.c file_runtime.c audio_runtime.c matrix_runtime.c \e
    simd_runtime.c mesh_runtime.c texture_runtime.c
.fi
.RE
.SS Compiling and running a Slag program
.RS
.nf
./slag program.slag
nasm -f win64 program.asm -o program.obj
x86_64-w64-mingw32-gcc program.obj -o program.exe \e
    -nostdlib -lkernel32 -luser32 -lgdi32 -lws2_32 -e _start
.fi
.RE
.PP
Add
.B \-mwindows
to suppress the console window for GUI-only programs.
.SS A minimal windowed program
.RS
.nf
function main() {
    window.open(320, 240, "Slag Demo");

    on key_down(int key) {
        if (key == 27) {        // Escape
            window.close();
        }
    }

    while (window.is_open()) {
        fill_triangle(40, 40, 200, 60, 90, 200, 255, 60, 60);
        window.flush();
    }

    return;
}
.fi
.RE
.SS Querying CPU topology
.RS
.nf
function main() {
    println(cpu.physical_cores());
    println(cpu.logical_cores());
    println(cpu.threads_per_core());
    println(cpu.hyperthreaded());
    return;
}
.fi
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I *.slag
Slag source files.
.TP
.I *.asm
NASM x86-64 Win64 assembly emitted by the compiler.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR nasm (1)
.PP
The full language specification and project README are distributed
with the source tree.
.SH AUTHOR
Nathaniel Spinks (Yokai).
